---
permalink: /
title: "About me"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---


Hi, I am Avinash Swaminathan. I am currently a final-year student at Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Delhi pursuing Bachelors of Engineering in Information Technology. Welcome to my world !!

Academic Coursework and Achievements
===
My coursework includes Computer Programming in C++, Data Structure and Algorithms, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Computer Networking, Computer Architecture, Cryptography, Linux Lab and other computer science fundamental courses. I am ranked amongst the top 5% of our batch with a CGPA of 9.21 and have been awarded a 4-year Government Merit scholarship for my academic performance.

Research Interests and  Work
===

My research interests lie in <b> Natural Language Processing, Information Extraction and Retrieval, Question-Answering Systems. </b> I have had prior research experience in NLP tasks like Keyphrase Generation, Text Summarisation, NLP tasks for Low-Resource languages.


I interned at Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology’s Multimodal and Digital Media Analysis Lab under the guidance of Prof. Rajiv Ratn Shah in the summer of 2019. I worked on developing <b> Generative Adversarial Networks to generate keyphrases. </b> The main inspiration for the research project came from the problems faced by keyphrases generated by State-Of-The-Art Seq2Seq models like CatSeq,CopyRNN. These keyphrases suffered from exposure bias and lack of text diversity leading to keyphrases that were machine-like in appearance. GANs have been used in similar NLP tasks like summarization, paraphrasing and text generation to eliminate these problems. Thus, we decided to experiment with GANs for the task of keyphrase generation

We designed a GAN model consisting of a generator and a discriminator. While the generator structure was similar to CatSeq, we developed a novel 2-level hierarchical-attention based Discriminator specifically for this task to distinguish between real and false keyphrases. Our GAN model was better than state-of-the-art in generating abstractive keyphrases and comparable to SOTA in generating extractive keyphrases. The generated keyphrases were far more diverse than SOTA models and exhibited an $\alpha$-NDCG measure  with a 5\% increase. 
A significant scope of the project involved collaborating with a large research group. We took guidance from  research scientists at Bloomberg NYC to get their application perspective.

Another area of research we worked on is the usage of <b> NLP to solve problems in  low-resource Indian languages. </b> Scarcity of data is a major limitation in such languages. Our research centered around overcoming this disadvantage in 4 Hindi classification datasets. To improve the amount of data available, we transformed the classification dataset into a Natural Language Inference Dataset. We took the input sentences as hypotheses and the target classes as inferences. We devised a novel two-step classification method that used these textual-entailment predictions from NLI Datasets for classification tasks in Hindi. Training textual-entailment models on non-English datasets could be difficult due to the paucity of data. We performed fine-tuning of pre-trained Multilingual models like mBERT and XLM-RobertA on our NLI datasets to boost model performance and overcome data scarcity. The two-step classification helped achieve better F1 scores than most conventional deep learning techniques. Working on a non-English NLP task enabled me to understand the significant challenges facing this domain and their solutions. 

Industrial Internships
===

I did my internship at <b> Microsoft Development Center </b> in the Microsoft Dataverse Team in the summer of 2020. I worked in C# and .NET to implement a feature to store time of creation in a backend SQL server whenever the user created a new record. I developed and implemented unit and integration tests to verify my code changes. The internship has been a great learning experience and gave me professional exposure to the technology industry. The apprenticeship taught me collaborating with a large team on a huge codebase, articulating my ideas to senior managers, and developing software that met the industry standards.


Extracurricular Activities
===
I had the  privilege to serve as the vice-president of Nakshatra-the college astronomy and mathematics club where I managed and coordinated day-to-day activities like publicity of events, weekly meetings,etc. I organized Kaggle-style ML competitions for our annual fest Ephemeris. I conducted weekly Special-Interest-Groups(SIGs) where I taught Deep and Machine Learning Concepts to junior students. I was  a member of both the Parliamentary Debating and Model United Nations team from NSIT. I attended many MUNs including Ramjas MUN, Jaypee MUN, etc. and was awarded the special mention at Jaypee MUN. I was also a member of the Organizing committee of NSITMUN. 


Careers Opportunities
===
I am looking for software engineering jobs involving Deep or Machine Learning in NLP. Have a look at my [resume](https://avinsit123.github.io/files/7046789_Avinash_Swaminathan_13395197_202012190941_Resume.pdf) here. 
For more information, send me a mail or DM on LinkedIn.
